why is it the Passover that becomes the
memorial in the foundation and is it the
sacrifice of the innocent and it's this
because it's the sacrifice of the Lambs
and the blood and so is the idea here
that the foundation of the proper state
is the voluntary sacrifice of the
innocent is it is that what's happening
no I don't think it's I don't think I
think that we need to see it really in
terms of of Egypt as
as opposites so you have the end of a
world Egypt ends God takes the seeds out
of Egypt we have a new beginning which
is also based on sacrifice it's based on
voluntary sacrifice but that's the magic
of of the the Passover sacrifice it's as
if if you are willing to give your
firstborn to God God will give him back
to you that's the surprise okay so is it
founded on the principle of voluntary
sacrifice no I don't think so you don't
think so okay I think the plain and
obvious thing this was a night of
Liberation right I agree with it went
out right now but but there's also a
sacrificial element that's that's too in
the Passover how it happened but the
basic thing and they remember it through
history Isn't it nice they were free to
say in our prayers
over and over
just as for the Christian the the
crucifixion and Resurrection are the
central events I believe of Christian
theology
the central events of Jewish Theology
and I didn't make this up it is constant
in Jewish prayer
is creation and exodus if If you deny
either of those and you're certainly
free to you you have put yourself
outside of Judaism that that is the
Jewish normative view yeah but I think
it's not necessary it's not a zero-sum
game you know we've been talking a lot
about reaction and Redemption these two
these are the two sides of the same coin
just as for Christians Crossing
resurrection and two sides of the same
coin yeah but it's it's a recreation of
the world
the giving up of your first fruits and
the giving up of that which is primary
to God and then the surprise of God
saying actually no
you can have it back right and I think
that that's definitely part of the it's
part of the story it's not the only
thing yeah
I know I wouldn't want to make it by the
way do any of you have a reaction and
I'm not I'm not you know urging that
there be one but I that idea that we
Jews have to remember this because God
may not intervene again does that strike
you as plausible because you do have the
mystery in in the Bible in some sense
and maybe in history itself is well if
God was there so much in the times that
are being described where did he go as
time progressed right that's the Deo
subscondus problem and and and and and I
don't know exactly how to contend with
that but but God is not involved in
Israel
I believe in the ultimate sense there's
no question God God is uh constantly the
the guardian of Israel it's that's
repeated
but it's clear that you know most people
don't know that in the 1660s about the
same percentage of Jews in Europe were
murdered uh as were by in the Holocaust
about a third uh or well two-thirds in
the case of the Holocaust I believe but
one-third and the malinsky pogroms in in
Ukraine and slash Poland uh and uh
God Saves the Jewish people but but not
the Jews and and that that by the way I
have comfort in that I don't expect to
be individually saved
I but I I just want to note that
religious Jews in death camps celebrated
to the best of their ability to Seder
so here they are facing gas Chambers
and saying thank you for saving us we
remember you saved us from from Pharaoh
it's an incredible thing and that's why
I say it gives it gives comfort
even though I'm not being saved now but
I know you intervened on our behalf I
think it makes sense for people to
believe in the fundamental ascendance of
the spirit that leads us from slavery
under all conditions because to not have
faith in that is really in some sense to
lose faith in life itself and so that
would even be if you're in in the
situation of a camp what do you have to
have faith in well in some sense just to
live and I think this is something
solzhenitzen observed too to just to
live under those conditions you still
have to believe in the ascendancy the
ultimate tendency of the spirit that
calls men mankind out of tyranny and
isn't it where the story picks up
because God existed before the Jews were
enslaved in Egypt they existed when all
the firstborn were killed right and so
it sort of depends where where it is
because you could say to them then when
they were in Egypt before God said I've
heard I've heard the cries of my people
it's sort of this same position right so
the god wasn't there right so we can
exactly correct okay okay so I would
like to point out that we've got through
one one verse so far
probably
it was a big one it was a big one we
need to get Shapiro in here reading
seven yeah so seven days seven days
shall you eat
unleavened bread even the first day you
shall put away leaven out of your houses
for whosoever eateth leavened bread from
the first day until the seventh day that
Soul shall be cut off from Israel
and in the first day there shall be
Unholy convocation and in the seventh
day there shall be a holy convocation to
you no manner of work shall be done in
them
save that which every man must eat
that may that only be done be done of
you it's another application of a set of
laws here and and an establishing set of
principles and ye shall observe the
Feast of unleavened bread for in this
self-same day have I brought your armies
out of the land of Egypt that's to your
point with regard to Freedom therefore
shall You observe this day in your
Generations by an ordinance an
interesting a ordinance because an
ordinance is something that that
ordinates it's like a coordinate it's
like a it's an establishing system by an
ordinance forever
in the first month on the 14 month 14th
day of the month even at even
ye shall eat unleavened bread until the
1 and 20th day of the month at even
seven days shall there be no leaven
found in your houses for whosoever
eateth that which is leavened even that
Soul shall be cut off from the
congregation of Israel whether he be a
stranger or born in the land
you shall eat nothing leavened in all
your habitations shall you eat
unleavened bread it's very much
emphasized there this this structure of
rules well it's not called Passover in
the Torah it's called the holiday of
matzas of unloaded bread
and do you think we analyzed the motif
of 11 minutes before by the way I will I
will get a ski jacket is that what it's
called I will buy one for anyone who
could name all the holidays of the Torah
now does this include all the people who
are listening
send in your response
no no I'm sorry could you think you
could it's an interesting question and
by the way there are seven
again seven oh I can't
come on Greg oh don't let us down I'm
I'm gonna kick this to Oz
you've got us Dennis the vast majority
of Jews couldn't do they would if they
would because one is very obscure and I
before all right so Shabbat Rosh
Hashanah which is called the day of of
trumpets Yom Kippur Passover Pentecost
Shavuot Tabernacle Sukkot
and then the seventh which is the the
one that trips up everybody including
most Jews called shmini atzeret it's his
own holiday it's the after the seven
days of Tabernacles is the Eighth Day
shmini means eighth at Sarah is
convocation meeting it is the only
holiday that has no purpose other than
having a good time it doesn't
commemorate anything it is a fascinating
thing so I don't I don't work on Jewish
holidays that are in the Torah that's so
I remember many of you know Larry Elder
who they got who ran you know for for
governor in California a dear friend of
mine so we used to be on the same
station in Los Angeles and I would be on
in the afternoon and he would follow me
and in his talk show and he so I said so
Larry just want you to know I won't be
on tomorrow he goes why I said I well
you know I don't broadcast on Jewish
holidays and he goes which holiday is it
Amigos Mini at Sarat and the guy was
convinced I made it up to take the day
off